[music]
[Peter] So here we are, Downtown Starke.
-Chief Deputy, should I call you Brad?
-Call me Brad.
[Peter] This town, pretty much
the economy is built off the prison, right?
Yes. Prison industry is still
one of the largest economic drivers of all.
Now this building right here,
this is an old bank building.
We can go in here if you want to.
We got a camera going, Susan.
-What's in the safe?
-Storage.
-That's an old classic door.
Not so much money in here anymore.
[Susan] No money.
-Those are some secure CDs.
Okay, so what was it before prisons here?
Railroad came through.
It was a railroad stop.
Once Flagler built the East Coast Railroad…
-Yep
…this was a spur coming off of that.
And then not long after, Camp Blanding,
which is about six miles to the east…
-Okay.
…that became a training grounds
for World War II.
At one point, Camp Blanding,
because of all the people
that were training to go over into Europe,
I want to say it was like
the second or third largest city
in the state of Florida because of
the population that was out there.
-Okay.
[Brad] So we're going to be heading to a
couple of different correctional facilities
and the one prison in the state of Florida.
I'll put up a map here,
but we're in Starke.
-We're going to Raiford and Lake Butler.
-Correct.
Which is, like Starke, even maybe more so
tied into the prison economy.
-Yeah.
So you have the work crews
that come out of the prisons,
clean up the side of the highways,
that sort of stuff?
Clean up the side of the highways.
We got a project going on
at the courthouse right now
where we're doing
some secured parking for our judges.
And the inmates actually came out
and built the walls.
There was a day in time back
many years ago where it was forced labor.
And obviously that was
ruled unconstitutional.
Now it's voluntary.
So if the inmate wants to work outside
and they pass
the security screenings that they do,
they do get paid for their effort.
So this is old world Florida right here.
-This is the real deal.
-I love this street.
Now you can see some of these houses,
this one's been redone.
And when they redo them, they're gorgeous.
You know, I always think back 50 years ago
when these houses were originally built.
The craftsmanship
and the style is just so neat.
So this is my father's childhood home.
I used to give my parents a hard time
about not getting to grow up here
in Bradford County.
But my dad said that I was created
there in that house.
So it's got some sentimental value to me.
-You grew up in Miami, right?
Grew up in Miami.
We're going to pull in here real quick.
This is Danielle Smith, no relation.
But she's a very dynamic person
in the community.
-And I wanted you to meet her real quick.
-All right.
Guys, Starke has a feeling
I can't put a finger on yet.
Old world stuff.
Got a deep south feeling.
As they say, the more south you go,
the more north it gets in Florida.
So this is like northern Florida,
deep south.
Ooh, that smells good.
[Brad] Danielle.
[Peter] What's going on out here?
-I got a food truck out here in Starke.
I got a car wash.
-Good food?
-Oh, yeah, good food. Good barbecue.
-Best in town?
-Best in town.
I got my buddy Brad here with me.
Is he your best customer?
He's one of my best customers, I will say.
The first time I met her,
I was at my mom and dad's office.
And I see her come running up on foot.
She runs right up to my mom,
gets her car keys
and brings it back to do the car wash.
And then drove her car
back to the office and dropped it off
and then ran back down here on foot.
-And it's about a mile down the road.
-That's service.
Tell us, 'cause this video is about
the prison system in the area.
Do you have a lot of those workers
coming in here?
So, I have prison…
you know, come in looking for a job.
You know, when they transition
or just trying to find out.
Oh, when they get out of prison?
If they were local and you know them,
you build a relationship with people.
-It's all about trust.
-It's all about trust, yeah.
But you have no problem
giving someone a second chance?
Listen, just because,
you know, people in prison,
you got good people, you got bad people.
So, a lot of them
looking to change their lives.
You know, looking for opportunity.
Some will, some won't, so what, move on.
That's the thing, you know.
But everybody, honestly,
deserves a fair chance.
[Peter] Okay, a little detour
into the county jail.
[Brad] So, this is our pod control.
This is basically the local side of things.
This is local.
They get arrested on the initial charges
and they're housed here.
That's a mixed population.
So there could be a murderer all the way to
somebody that didn't pay child support
housed in here at any given time.
-So it's a unique situation.
-Okay.
And this woman over here is sort of
looking at the cameras, managing everyone.
'Cause we do have people
in cells out here, right?
We have people in cells.
They have access to phones.
They have access to books.
We feed them in there.
And then we also have a section
where we can take them out
for a period of time
every day in a courtyard area.
[Peter] All the cells here?
Is that what's…
[woman] Yes. This controls all of
the access doors to each of the areas
to include all the pods as well as
the individual cells that we have.
So that can be operated as well as
access to the entire pod area.
I don't know if I should
have this on camera.
Once this video goes live on YouTube,
they might be watching this video
on YouTube talking about this.
Yeah.
That's sort of funny, huh?
Or not?
-I mean, well, they don't have
access to live Internet here.
Not to say they don't get on their phones
or their video calls and somebody's like,
"Hey, look what we saw."
Yeah, "Look what we saw."
You know, but they don't
have access to it like right here.
They shouldn't.
I am the programs coordinator
here at the jail.
So I help to oversee any of the efforts
for the individuals to better themselves
or to try to make good use
of their time while they're here.
Rewarding work?
Very.
-When it works?
-When it works it's always…
-And this is your mother?
-This is my mother.
And you were saying off camera,
third generation, in corrections.
-She's the third.
-You came down from Tennessee.
-Yes.
When the going gets tough in the economy,
this is a great line of work.
Absolutely.
-That's why you guys came from Tennessee?
-Absolutely.
My father was self-employed
and owned several businesses in Tennessee.
And as the economy
kind of tanked and went downhill,
he was looking for retirement.
-Oh, okay.
-And with the benefits.
And that's how we ended up down here.
Then when I came along and was old enough
and started having my family
in order to provide
good insurance and the benefits
that you're always looking for
with small kids and everything,
then I went to
the Department of Corrections as well.
It was one of the best jobs
you could get in the area.
-You were in at the state prison?
-Mm-hmm. Yes.
We're going there next.
My grandfather started there.
He was hired on at Florida State Prison.
He was one of the…
He was around for various high-profile
inmates who were executed out there.
Ted Bundy.
-Ted Bundy?
-The early '80s.
And then he retired
in the late '90s from out there.
And then, of course, she worked there
and then I actually worked there.
-So it's going…
-So it's like… Yeah.
-Do you have kids?
-I do.
-They're probably a bit young, but…
-They are.
…do you want them to work there
when they grow up? Would you?
Do you want to keep this lineage going?
I know that within corrections
and within any type of law enforcement
or anything like that,
that's where my heart is.
So I know it can be rewarding.
I know it can be… fun.
I know it can be all the things.
It can be stressful of course,
just nature of the work.
But I know that if that's
where their heart lies
and that's something they're interested in,
I would support them.
-So it's where your heart is.
-Yep.
What do you get out of it?
There's a certain fulfillment
in knowing that you've
helped an underdog,
someone who has struggled
or who has had bad luck all along the way,
and everything that could possibly
go wrong and against them has,
and then to be able to come in and
give them a little bit of encouragement
or give them some tools or whatever it is
that they need to start helping them…
-…to get out of a cycle of being in this.
-Okay.
then it's like, hah.
Especially if that goes to their kids.
-So you get connected
to them a little emotionally.
Yeah, it can.
I mean, it is definitely a line
that you have to balance.
-I'd imagine, yeah.
-You know, you can't…
But I think over the years,
I've been able to do that
and keep that professionalism,
but also that I care
and I do want to see you do better
and I do want to see you do well.
That's one of the differences that
you'll see with the state prison system
and with the jails
is most of the people we deal with in here
are people that are in our community.
We've either watched them grow up.
They've gone to school with us,
our children.
We know these people.
So if we can do anything
to positively impact
and kind of help them out,
then that's great.
So there's times when
we can be out locally
and we have people that approach us
and they talk to us
just like anybody else.
[Peter] Florida State Prison.
[Brad] Oh, yeah. This is the start
of the property right here.
The highest security you can get.
And it's death row, which it's
the end of the line for many of them.
Basically, as far as you can see
to the county line,
which is about a mile up the road there
is Florida State Prison.
To the left are some officer housing
and then there are some
administrative buildings and a warehouse.
Out here in these fields they raise cattle.
They raise crops to help feed the inmates.
We've actually set the record
this past year in 2025
for the number of people
that have been put to death for the year.
-And they use an injection now.
It's not the chair, right?
Correct.
Because before it was,
I read it was the chair.
And they would take people
from the community.
Nobody knew who it was.
Different people, maybe even every time,
they got paid like $150 to do it.
Yeah, the executioner.
The executioner, right.
Now, they still do that with the injection.
There's a way that they actually set it up.
And they don't identify
who the executioner is.
[Brad] I actually witnessed
one of the executions
and it was by lethal injection.
It was kind of a last minute.
The courts turned down his appeal
and the execution moved forward.
They needed to bring in
witnesses to see it.
They called the office.
I happened to be the one
that answered the phone.
And they asked if we had any officers
that would come
be on the witness panel.
-How heavy was that day?
What was that like?
It was a very interesting experience.
Correctional officers,
they have certain people identified
to work in certain spots of the process.
The most mature, respectful,
professional individuals
are the ones that are actually
working right up close to
where the execution is occurring.
So they have a whole process.
They meet off site for the witnesses.
It could be family members
of the person being put to death
or it could be family members
of the person that was victimized.
Then they also have independent
witnesses that come in.
It was regimented, very medical
type of process that took place.
They explained to us the process
going into it so we knew.
But there wasn't a word spoken
as far as the witness panel
probably for about an hour
it was just complete silence
from the moment
that we left the meeting spot
to going in, witnessing it,
and then leaving out of there.
-Wow.
-It was a very somber,
serious point in time.
Now, this little building that comes out
towards us right here at the end,
see how you got the wings going
those ways and then you got
the one coming out this end?
-Yep.
-That's the death chamber
on the bottom floor.
The rest of the wings
are where the inmates are housed.
And then you'll see these areas.
They look like containment areas
right here, fenced in areas.
And that's where they'll
bring them out if they're isolated
and aren't allowed
to have contact with anybody else,
they have their own little section
that they're allowed to come out.
You can hear them right now.
Oh, yeah.
Can you stop for a sec? Is it alright?
Can we show the video
of where you said death row was?
Yeah. Yeah.
I mean, I don't want to get you in trouble.
It's not gonna get me in trouble.
We're driving through.
[inmates speaking in the distance]
[Peter] Is it like that all day?
[Brad] Not all day.
You know, those are the ones that are…
I don't know, maybe…
I think they're inside, right?
Are they inside?
-I don't see anyone outside.
-I don't see anybody outside.
So, yeah, it could be like that.
Alright, guys, I want to talk to you
about something happening
behind the scenes to all of us.
Our personal data
gets hoovered up by data brokers
and sold all across the Internet.
So earlier this year,
I found a solution to this problem,
Incogni.
Incogni is a
personal information removal service
that wipes yourself from the Internet.
So we have the right
to remove ourselves from these lists.
But to try to do this one by one
would be a full-time job.
I started using Incogni in February
and I've seen exceptional results.
Here's my dashboard where
I've been removed from 1,448 data brokers.
And you can see here
all of the data brokers
that have tried to poach
my personal information.
For me, I currently have 237
that are being removed.
So what you need to do
is sign up to Incogni
and they'll do the consistent,
constant, in-the-background work
of removing you from these websites.
So I've received way less
spam emails, spam calls,
junk mail, which removes
one of life's biggest annoyances.
And since this is a game like whack-a-mole,
you can't just do this once and be done.
It's a constant process
and that's why having Incogni
working 24-7, 365
in the background is crucial.
I strongly suggest
getting Incogni's unlimited plan,
which gives the option to request
custom removals from any website.
There's a huge discount if you use
my link down below in the description
to get 60% off an annual plan.
Take back your personal data with Incogni.
Click on the link below
incogni.com/santenello
to get 60% off their annual plan.
Now back to the story.
[Brad] My father was a prison guard,
but he worked the tower.
He said it was a draining job
that you sat day in and day out
just watching these secured fence areas
to make sure nobody's trying to escape.
-And it's 99.999% of your time
is watching nothing happening.
Watching nothing happen.
But that one moment that something does
happen, you have to stop the person.
-You can't miss it.
-Yeah, you can't miss it.
Before all  the good cameras
and motion sensors.
[Peter] It's such an
interesting feel out here.
You have this cutesy little town,
and then you have some of the most
hardened criminals right here.
The only place for death row in the state.
So there's just… it's heavy.
The death penalty
is obviously a very sticky topic.
Now, when it hits home,
as in it affects me,
as in someone murders my mother,
do I want them to get the death penalty?
I don't know right now.
I'd have to feel it happen, right?
Personally, maybe it would be very clear.
Maybe it'd be like
that person deserves to be off this earth,
or maybe I'd have some
bit of empathy for that not to happen.
I don't know. I haven't been there, right?
So until you've been there
it's hard to know, right?
Like, if you are on
the victim side of that.
Well, I mean, you know, different people
have different opinions about it.
My personal opinion is I fully support it.
I know the process that it goes through,
and it takes decades
from the time that
they're convicted of the crime
in order to be put to death.
All the appeals processes
that are in place, it is a deterrent.
People know that there's that possibility
that they could be put to death.
Now, this is New River that we're crossing,
going into Union County.
-And the prison continues?
Directly across the street,
or across the county line,
is Union Correctional.
Okay, so separate.
It's separate, different counties.
Now, they do have people
that are on death row living over here,
and they'll transfer them over if
the warrant is signed for their execution.
This is housing for correctional officers
to be readily available.
If they have a major incident go down
they can recall people that are off duty
to get them here to assist.
-How often is it that
somebody actually escapes
or that doesn't happen anymore?
It is so rare for it to happen.
The last time I can remember
one happening was about 10 years ago.
It was an inmate that had
reached like a trustee type status
and was working outside
the prison walls basically.
As soon as they realized
he had walked off or ran off,
there was a two-day
search for this guy.
The thickest woods, they have
several bloodhound units
where we had a dog on the ground
for two days straight.
And as soon as that dog would tire out,
they'd put another one on the ground
and chase that guy the whole time.
He had no time
to stop and relax or anything.
By the end of the two days, he was so
tired, so hungry and eaten up by bugs
and torn up by the thick brush
that he was having to go through
that he came out onto the street
and surrendered to an officer
that was set up on the perimeter.
We're going down here
is where the graveyard is.
-Graveyard?
They actually have a cemetery
for inmates that have died while in custody
and we're pulling up to it here
in just a minute.
Here's a placard.
"This grounds renovation,
beautification and perpetual…
is the result of hard work…
private donation…"
[Peter] Okay so these are all convicts
that died in the prison?
-Yes.
-No family members?
Nobody's claimed the body
and they have the right to a burial.
And like like this says
at the very bottom it says
"They pay their debt to society,
may God remit their debt to him."
1997 on that one.
-Arthur Schaefer.
-James Warren.
-'99.
Milson Joseph Edward.
You're used to this stuff
it's nothing for you Brad
but it's a bit wild to come into
I'm not going to lie.
I'll have to say this,
I've driven out here a couple times
'cause we have a training facility,
firearms training out here
from time to time
and I noticed the cemetery.
I've never stopped here.
This is my first time actually stopping
and my personal thought
when I first saw it and realized
what it was is you know good gracious,
these are human beings
like the placard said
they they paid their debt to society
died while they were in prison
and there was nobody there
to claim the body
and this is where they lay.
I commend the Department of Corrections for
giving them some sort of respectful burial.
-'Cause nobody would know or care.
Right.
That's one of the things I've learned
about being in this community is that
the people in
the Department of Corrections,
they care about the people as individuals.
Even up into the point of putting somebody
to death in the death chamber.
They they are giving them
respect and dignity
that they probably did not…
I say probably…
Almost assuredly didn't give their victims
any type of respect.
-Wouldn't you say though, Brad,
like any profession,
there are good ones
and bad ones and of course, like,
there'll be a bad guy a guy in there
that's not that great.
You hope to weed those guys out
and you want, like in your office,
or with any profession
you want awesome doctors.
You don't want malpractice.
And so it's human
right, to get people that are bad
and that infiltrates everything
and there's gonna be some of it in there.
Some in here, there’s definitely
some bad YouTubers, that's for sure.
And you can imagine your job is to go in
and deal with these populations
and these particular prisons,
these are some of the worst of the worst.
-First degree murder, rapists.
-Yeah, and it could be lower-level crimes,
but they've committed
other crimes while in prison,
gotten to a point where
they have to go into a higher security
because they can't manage them
in lower security.
Not been able to acclimate
to the prison environment.
[Brad] From here to Downtown Starke
is about seven miles.
That's two maximum security prisons,
seven miles.
[Peter] Yeah, I wanted to drop
some info I found last night.
Florida Department of Corrections
is the third biggest in the country.
Which makes sense.
It's the third biggest population.
Inmate population
is roughly 89,000 right now.
It's the largest agency
administrated by the State of Florida
with a budget of $3.3 billion.
With a B.
These are government jobs.
There's no third party…
-It's not privatized.
They looked at, a few years ago,
doing some privatization.
I think when Jeb Bush was governor.
It didn't work out well, so they stopped.
-And we're going to meet a guy today,
former corrections officer.
He agreed to be on camera
because you can't get someone
currently working in there on camera.
-Yeah, it's interesting.
-It's not going to happen.
They are tight-knit community,
and they are worried about media
and talking to the public
about what's going on
because they're afraid that it's
gonna be misconstrued what they say.
As a creator,
I can make the best things sound terrible
and the worst things
sound great with voice over,
the right music, the right editing.
Absolutely.
You never know who's coming up
with the camera and I get that
because someone might have
good intentions but they might not.
We were passing some signs back there
that said starting $22 an hour.
-Probably a correctional officer.
Right around the $50,000 a year mark.
-And so the reason they have
all the prisons up here
and correctional facilities,
cheap land, rural communities.
They had, back then, people were
worried about living around a prison,
so they tried to put 'em
out in isolated areas.
-Okay.
-Where there wasn't much of a population.
I talked to a gentleman
about two or three years ago.
He called and was looking at
purchasing a property.
They were moving up from Sarasota area.
The property that they really liked
and wanted to buy backed up to and adjoin
the Florida State Prison property line.
And his question to me was,
how safe or unsafe
would it be for him
to move his family up here?
And I told him
the closer you are to a prison,
the less chance of an escaped prisoner
stopping to hide out at your house.
They are wanting to get
as far away as fast as they can.
So if your property
is right next to the prison,
if they ran across your property,
they would be gone within seconds.
He ended up buying it,
moving in, and loves it.
[Peter] Okay, Downtown Lake Butler.
-This is it.
-This is the center point.
This used to be the only red light.
Now they got another one around the corner.
This is the courthouse
and the sheriff's office
and the jail is on the back side of that.
-That's nice.
-And I believe it's the only county
in the state that does not have a hotel.
There's McDonald's right here on the right
that just opened up about two years ago.
So that's a big deal in a town like this.
-Huge deal.
-Huge deal?
[Brad] Huuge.
[Peter] Everyone's pumped up on that?
So I'm going to eat at the Skip's Deli's.
There's the IGA right there.
-Okay. Talk to the owner here.
I'll meet you at Skip's.
Right behind there
is Jackson's Building Supply.
So a lot of locals go there
to get their hardware.
[Peter] You're an early eater, Brad, huh?
11:00.
-Yeah.
-I'll be back in a little bit.
-All right.
-I'm going to go try these guys.
-Good luck.
-I got my phone on me if you need anything.
-Okay. Thanks, Brad.
[man] I don't want to stand
in front of my dead plants.
The freeze has killed them.
-It froze, huh?
-Yeah.
So you're Mike Spires. This is your market.
Yeah. Four generations.
-Four generations?
-Yep.
I thought you'd be cool to talk to
because you deal with everyone.
A store like this in a town like this,
you talk to everyone.
Yeah.
What's going on, would you say,
wide question, answer it any way you want.
What's going on
with the prison system these days
and the employment
and what you see from your shop?
I know they were having
some issues with recruitment.
-Oh.
-So I'm not sure.
-I guess all of that's working itself out.
-Okay.
I think the governor's
done a good job of
trying to help the prison system out.
Okay.
They play a huge part in this community.
It's just part of us.
It's part of who we are and part of
what our community is all about.
-So for you, it's just totally normal.
It's just another industry,
keeps the lights on, keeps things going.
Yes. A big part of it.
-And you got the IGA. That's a classic.
-Yeah, it is.
-Been around forever.
I've had… There's probably
quite a few current correctional officers
that started out
in high school working here.
So we were talking about that
with someone the other day
and they said, yeah, IGAs.
I've heard of IGAs.
I said yeah, you would be surprised
how many people I've talked to
just out of the blue saying,
"Oh, I have a family member,
that was their first job growing up."
You must hear all sorts of things
from people working in on the inside.
-Family members.
-I hear.
And it's tough.
From what I can gather,
I can just imagine, it's a tough job.
I mean, you're dealing with
a society that's not the best.
-And these guys are from who knows where.
-Yeah.
They're not from here, mostly.
-Mostly South Florida I'll bet.
-Oh, yeah. Yeah.
Most of the crime
that takes place is elsewhere.
But in Raiford, which is where
the hardened criminals are,
death penalty, death row,
all that's out there.
If you have a chance to go ride by that.
-Oh, we just did.
It's a unique place out there.
-And you know,
what I think goes unnoticed,
the prison system, while you can
take a bunch of different angles on it,
the reality we're in, if those don't exist,
if our most hardened criminals
aren't there,
and the people working here
don't keep that going,
then all of our lives are much worse.
It would be chaotic.
-It'd be chaotic.
-Yep.
So actually, I never even thought of
thanking the corrections officer
ever in my life.
And I'm sure there's some bad ones
I wouldn't want to thank,
but I'm sure the majority aren't.
-They do a good job.
-Oh, yeah. Yeah.
And without them, we have
way sketchier streets.
Yes. So we're all connected.
-Appreciate it.
-Yes, sir.
-A lot of your customers from the…
-From the prison.
And we have clear containers just for them,
'cause they can't take their food in
if it's not wrapped in a clear container
or some kind of saran wrap
or something like that.
Oh, right.
-Did you know that, Brad?
-I did not know that.
-So no shank can be hidden type stuff.
-Right.
-Or drugs or whatever, right?
So it's super important
for you then, these workers?
Mm-hmm. Yes, sir.
That's what most of
the income is around here
is the prisons in Union County
unless you work at a gas station…
-…or, you know…
-Sandwich shop.
At the sandwich shop down here with us.
Can I show the sandwiches?
Is that all right?
There you go.
You go heavy on the meat.
I like that.
Looks good.
[Peter] So just nice, quaint little town.
You have a job at the prison.
You're making 50 grand
maybe starting, 48 grand.
Work up a little bit.
Maybe your wife's in there
involved somehow.
You can make over 100 grand.
Houses here, I'm just
guessing, $200,000, $300,000?
Yeah, no, it's not any more than that.
Nicer houses are about $250,000, $300,000.
-So for Florida, cheap real estate?
-Comparatively speaking, yes.
All three counties
that we've been talking about,
each county only has one high school,
which draws the community
even closer together.
Especially like on Friday nights
during football season,
it is the biggest event.
And the rivalries between
those three schools are second to none.
If it's an away game, each town will
pretty much move their entire population
over to the other town
to cheer on their team and
have some really good football.
-So it's a big deal here?
-It is.
High school football.
What are those buses up there?
-Inmates are getting bussed around?
-Yeah, probably. We'll follow it.
I'm pretty sure it's gonna be
going to the Regional Medical Center,
the biggest facility that they have
right here in Lake Butler.
-That's connected with the prison system?
-Yes.
This is the one when people get sent
to the Department of Corrections,
this part of the state, they all
come out here for their medical evaluation.
If they have serious medical issues
and need extended medical stays,
they house them out here.
[Peter] You've got to think that bus ride,
if you're an inmate, right?
This bus ride has to be
the best thing happening.
Just being sort of out
in society a little bit.
-Yep.
-Beautiful road.
No windows, so they can't break anything.
Well, smaller windows
that they can't climb out of, yes.
But this is the sports complex here.
Baseball, football,
I think they even have soccer out here.
-So it's just an intertwined
part of existence here.
-Yes.
-The prisoners go by while you're playing
baseball and everything's normal.
Well, you know, most of the coaches,
the parents of the kids that are out here,
are employed at the prisons.
So the doctors and nurses
that work in these facilities,
do they train for this?
I would think they have to be like…
-They would be given, and continually,
because there are certain
rules and procedures
that they have to follow per state law.
-This thing goes on forever.
-It's giant.
We're pretty much surrounded by it.
The camera doesn't do it all,
unfortunately.
I don't have a zoom lens with this,
but it's pretty much all around us.
There's actually nice grounds here,
I gotta say.
It's beautiful out here.
It's manicured
and taken care of by the inmates.
Oh, the inmates are doing all this.
-They're cleaning all this up.
-Mowing it.
[Brad] Those are two inmates.
[cell phone rings]
-Hey, Brett.
-Man, where are y'all located?
We are crossing the runway out here at RMC.
-Yeah, I'll meet you back there.
[Peter] So, Brad sort of
suckered you into this.
[Brett] Yeah, that's right.
All right.
So, Brad, we're going to let you chill.
-Good.
-You get a break from me.
It's probably a good thing.
-We can walk. Are you cool with walking?
-Yeah, man. It's so beautiful. Absolutely.
And Brett, you worked
in corrections for how long?
I was with the department
for right at about 17 years.
When did you start? How old?
I started here
at the reception and medical center.
I was 19 years old,
freshly out of high school.
I had a young family.
And, quite frankly,
just needed a job with benefits.
And, you know, it was
a great opportunity to start a retirement.
And it's one of those things
that I never really thought
I was going to have to think of
so early in life.
But starting a family,
you know, that age, you know,
it was just something that was necessary.
It's certainly not your
regular 8 to 5 desk job.
But I'll tell you, I have no regrets.
It was probably one of
the best decisions I ever made.
Really? Okay.
And that is a city in and of itself.
Okay.
It essentially has everything that we have.
Its own governing laws,
its own rules and regulations.
You know, out here we have speed limits
and those sorts of things.
And they have
just their different set of rules
and regulations that they live by.
It is something that people
don't know about.
They don't know much about
what the daily routine is
for any of these guys
that work here in these prisons.
In all reality, just the sheer
level of skill that it takes
just to communicate.
There's such a diverse population
inside of those fences.
Many of the folks that work in
these facilities
are from the local areas.
In our area, right here
in the heart of North Central Florida,
there's diversity in the population
outside of the prison.
But whenever you get inside there,
it is all worlds that come together.
-Oh yeah.
And just having the skills to communicate,
maintain order,
and just make things happen.
-And I can imagine
a lot of the people in here,
their emotional intelligence
is like an 11 out of 10.
Oh yeah.
They know how to manipulate.
They're street smarts.
Sure.
So if you're going there weak…
Yeah.
…as a corrections officer,
you're not on, right?
-No.
-It's a code of respect?
It is.
I know a lot of folks
have an us versus them type mentality.
And in a sense, it is.
-Sure.
-If you think about it like this…
…these officers that work here,
they're here for their 8 hours
or 12 hours, whatever their shift is.
But there's always kind of a light
at the end of the tunnel for them.
They know that whenever
they're scheduled to go home,
they get to leave this behind.
And they get to go to
their husbands and their wives
and their kids and those sorts of things.
And they kind of set this aside.
-Mm-hmm.
The guys that live here,
they have 24-7
to think about how to manipulate,
how to make things happen their way.
And so you've really got to be diligent.
On your toes, so to speak,
whenever you're here and supervising.
Oftentimes, there's one person supervising
well over a hundred inmates at one time.
So if you don't know
how to handle yourself
and to communicate,
it can be very difficult.
-You're on your toes?
Absolutely.
-Dangerous?
-Dangerous.
I mean, okay, you leave
your wife and kids in the morning.
Slight chance a shank comes at you.
Something happens every day.
High stress.
Then you clock out.
You go home.
You might be the little league coach.
Oh, yeah.
You might just
go get an ice cream with the kids.
And you just, what do you do,
just flip the switch every day?
Well, you have to.
It's just a means of dealing with stress.
Everyone's different.
Yeah.
Personally, whenever I was working here,
I did have young families.
I did coach the little league teams.
Okay, that was you.
The Pop Warner football teams
or something year-round.
And just being involved
in your regular activities.
But still, whenever,
you know, it may be midnight
that you're coming in.
That's the way it was whenever I started.
I left home at 11:30.
Okay.
Whenever all of my family
was going to sleep.
And you stayed up all night.
And whenever you leave,
everybody's getting ready to go to school
and go about their regular day.
And you sleep.
[laughs]
Did you feel like nobody
could understand you who's not in there?
Oh, that's for sure.
It's been a good amount of years
since I worked here.
I can see people
that I haven't seen in many years.
Guys and men and women
that
we worked together for some time.
It may have been 20 years ago.
But whenever we see each other,
it's almost like a special bond.
You know, it's almost like you have
never been away from each other.
Your relationships pick up
right where they left off.
-Oh, yeah.
It's just kind of a fraternity,
so to speak.
Before I was 30,
I saw so many things
that I probably wouldn't have normally seen
just living out on,
you know, in the free world.
It wasn't here,
but there was an institution that I was at
that, you know,
you saw a little more violence.
I was a first responder
to a case where
another inmate had attacked one
and I guess the term would be the shank,
but an ice pick style weapon
had stabbed this other guy.
I think the final count
was over a hundred times
between the neck and his waist.
And that was
a pretty rough set right there.
You have to go hands on.
Because not only are you
responsible for the security.
Making sure these guys are still there.
You're also responsible
for their well-being.
These correctional officers,
if they see an inmate
that is in a life or death situation,
they're going to do everything that
they can possibly do to save that life.
Because that inmate is in the care
of the department as well.
And so, you know, a lot of times
things are looked at
negatively from more of a
discipline point of view. Okay?
These "guards", as a lot of people
refer to these officers as,
their job is just to be mean and to punish.
That's not necessarily the case at all.
What people don't hear
is whenever these officers
make life-saving decisions
to help these guys.
To administer CPR.
To put their hands over wounds
that are bleeding profusely.
It's just a full circle of life.
You know, you work there.
You live a portion of your life there.
But never forget that
anyone that is under your custody
is also under your care.
And you're responsible for that life.
And so, just kind of
a different outlook
that a lot of people
won't really think about.
[Brett] You're getting a suntan.
He's rolling his sleeves up.
[Peter] Well guys,
interesting stuff out here.
At least for me as an outsider.
-You know, it's just normal life here.
-Yeah.
You know, we don't think about it
until somebody that
isn't around it on a regular basis,
kind of like you or some of your viewers,
We don't think of it as anything
out of the ordinary.
And we love having it here.
The people that work in there
are just incredible people.
People are very nice in your towns here.
Yeah.
-I just got in last night.
-It's the heartbeat of Florida.
It is, huh?
Those are fighting words.
You can't get to heaven
without going through Bradford.
-Oh.
-[Brett] Or Union.
-Or Union, or Baker.
Thanks for showing me a little today
and sharing your story.
Thanks for being on camera
'cause that's really hard to find.
-Absolutely. Yeah, man.
-Appreciate that.
Brad, appreciate it.
All right, guys.
Thanks for coming on that journey.
Until the next one.
[country music]